# Conditional statements

This reading introduces you to the conditional statements of <b>if</b>, <b>else</b> and <b>elif</b>.

## If

In keeping with the light switch example, the state of the switch can be stored with a Boolean value of <b>True</b> or <b>False</b>.

* On = True

* Off = False

```python
#Light is currently off
current = False

if current:
    current = False
    print('Turning light off')

if not current:
    current = True
    print('Turning light on')
```

The code snippet above has a variable called <b>current</b> which keeps track of the state of the light - on or off. The first <b>if</b> statement will check if the light is on and if it is, the flow will go inside the condition and set the <b>current</b> variable to <b>False</b> - turning the light off. In the above code snippet, the value of the <b>current</b> variable is initially set to <b>False</b>, so this condition is not met.

The second <b>if</b> statement will check if the light is off and if it is, the flow will go inside the condition and will set the <b>current</b> varaible to <b>True</b> - turning the light on. 

## If else

The above code works fine but it can be rewritten more effectively by using another condition called <b>else</b>. The following code is an example:

```python
current = False

if current:
    current = False
    print('Turning light off')
else: 
    current = True
    print('Turning light on')
```

The <b>else</b> statement has made your code a bit easier to read and given that the flow relates to the same condition, it makes more sense to combine them as part of a single unit.

## elif

Python also has another condition called <b>elif</b> which helps when you have multiple conditions to satisfy. The light switch example is pretty straightforward in that you only have to check for the state of on or off - <b>True</b> or <b>False</b>. In certain conditions, it may not be that easy. Thankfully <b>elif</b> is here to help.

Let's say you want to give a certain discount to customers if they spend over $100. You will also provide an extra discount if that customer is part of a loyalty program. If the customer is not part of the loyalty program and did not spend over a $100, a service charge of 5% is applied.

```python
loyalty_customer = True
total_bill = 124

if loyalty_customer and total_bill > 100:
    #give 20% discount
    total_bill = total_bill - (float(total_bill)/ 100) * 20
elif total_bill > 100:
    #give 10% discount
    total_bill = total_bill - (float(total_bill)/ 100) * 10
else:
    #sorry no discount, 5% service charge applied.
    print('Sorry, no discount ...')

print('Total Bill: ', float(total_bill))
```

The above code snippet first checks to see if the customer is part of the loyalty program and if they are spending over $100. If both conditions are met, a discount of 20% is applied to the bill. The <b>elif</b> statement will only be executed if the first <b>if</b> condition is not met. The <b>elif</b> statement will only check if the bill is over $100 and if it is, it will apply a discount of 10%  to the bill.

The final <b>else</b> statement is only executed if neither of the other two conditions are met. In this case, a charge of 5% is applied to the bill.